Easy Excel Interview Questions
Microsoft Excel is an essential tool used across various industries for data management, analysis, and reporting.
Whether you are preparing for an entry-level position or looking to refresh your fundamental Excel skills.
The Easy Excel Interview Questions category is a great place to start. 
This section covers the basic yet crucial functionalities of Excel, including common formulas, 
                                                                              fundamental functions (SUM, AVERAGE, COUNT),
                                                                              data formatting techniques,
                                                                              and basic spreadsheet navigation.
Understanding these concepts will help you build confidence in working with Excel and demonstrate your ability to perform essential tasks in a structured and efficient manner.
Employers often assess these foundational skills to ensure candidates can handle day-to-day spreadsheet operations with ease.
Author: Kirolos Girgis

1) What is the difference between a workbook and a worksheet?

ANSWER:
A Workbook is an Excel file that contains one or more worksheets, its the entire file where the data is stored. On the other hand, A Worksheet is a single sheet within  a workbook where data, formulas, and charts are stored.

2) How do you apply a filter in EXCEL?

ANSWER:
To apply a filter:
Select the data range you want to filter.
Go to the Data tab and click on Filter.
Dropdown arrows will appear at the top of each column. You can click the arrow to filter by specific criteria.

3) What is the difference between relative, absolute, and mixed cell references in EXCEL?

ANSWER:
A Relative reference Changes when the formula is copied to another cell. While Absolute reference Remains constant no matter where it is copied. Mixed reference either the column (A) or the row (1) is fixed, but not both.

4) What is conditional Formatting and how is it used?

ANSWER:
Conditional formatting is used to automatically apply formatting to cells based on specific criteria. The way it is used is that you select the range of cells you want to format and go to the Home tab and click on Conditional Formatting then choose a rule or create a custom formula.

5) What is the purpose of the VLOOKUP function in EXCEL?

ANSWER: 
VLOOKUP or vertical lookup is used to find a value in the first column of a range and return a corresponding value in the same row from another column

6) What is the difference between a formula and a function in EXCEL?

Answer:
A formula is an expression created by the user to perform calculations while a function is a predefined formula in Excel

7) What are pivot tables in EXCEL?

Answer:
Pivot tables are a powerful feature in Excel used to summarize, analyze and present large datasets in a meaningful way. They allow you to quickly calculate metrics like sums, averages, and counts grouped by categories.

8) How do you freeze panes in Excel?

ANSWER:
To freeze panes and keep specific rows or columns visible while scrolling:
Select the row below or column to the right of where you want the freeze to apply.
Go to the View tab and click on Freeze Panes.
Choose Freeze Top Row, Freeze First Column, or Freeze Panes based on your needs.

9) What is the shortcut to quickly select an entire column or row?

ANSWER:

To select an entire column: Press Ctrl + Space.
To select an entire row: Press Shift + Space.

10) How do you remove duplicates in Excel?

ANSWER:
Select the range of data where you want to remove duplicates.
Go to the Data tab and click on Remove Duplicates.
Select the columns to check for duplicates and click OK.

11) What is the AutoFill feature in Excel?

ANSWER:
AutoFill allows users to quickly fill adjacent cells with data, formulas, or patterns. It is commonly used for filling sequences (e.g., dates, numbers) by dragging the fill handle at the bottom-right corner of a selected cell.

12) How do you insert a chart in Excel?

ANSWER:
Select the data you want to visualize.
Go to the Insert tab.
Choose a chart type (e.g., Bar Chart, Line Chart, Pie Chart).
Customize the chart as needed using Chart Tools.

13) How do you merge cells in Excel?

ANSWER:
Select the cells you want to merge.
Go to the Home tab and click on Merge & Center.
Choose Merge & Center, Merge Across, or Merge Cells based on your preference.

14) What is the Text to Columns feature in Excel?

ANSWER:
Text to Columns splits text from one column into multiple columns based on a delimiter (e.g., commas or spaces).
Select the column with the data you want to split.
Go to the Data tab and click on Text to Columns.
Choose Delimited or Fixed Width and follow the wizard steps.

15) How do you quickly find and replace data in Excel?

ANSWER:
Press Ctrl + H to open the Find and Replace dialog.
Type the value you want to find in the "Find what" field.
Enter the replacement value in the "Replace with" field.
Click Replace All to update all instances at once.

16) What is the COUNT function used for in Excel?

ANSWER:
The COUNT function is used to count the number of numeric values in a range. For example:
=COUNT(A1:A10)
This formula counts how many cells in A1:A10 contain numbers.
