Intermediate Excel Interview Questions
As businesses become increasingly data-driven, the ability to manage and analyze data efficiently is highly valued.
The Intermediate Excel Interview Questions category is designed for individuals who are comfortable with Excel basics and are looking to advance their skills to handle more complex tasks. 
This section includes questions on lookup functions (VLOOKUP, HLOOKUP, and XLOOKUP), conditional formatting, pivot tables, data validation, and logical functions such as IF, AND, and OR.
These concepts are commonly tested in interviews to evaluate a candidate’s ability to process and analyze data effectively.
Mastering these intermediate-level Excel skills will not only help you stand out in job interviews but also enable you to handle real-world data challenges more efficiently.
Author: Kirolos Girgis

1) Explain the use of COUNTIF and COUNTIFS?

The COUNTIF couunts cells that meet a single condition, while COUNTIFS counts cells that meet multiple critieria

2)  How do you remove duplicates in a dataset?

Select the data then go to the data tab then click on remove duplicates then select the columns you want to remove duplicates from. then click ok

3) What is the purpose of a Pivot Table? How would you summarize sales data by region and salesperson?

Pivot Tables allow you to summarize, group, and analyze large datasets.
Select data → Insert Pivot Table.
Drag "Region" to Rows and "Salesperson" to Rows.
Drag "Sales" to Values.

4) How do you use conditional formatting to highlight cells greater than the average?

Select the range → Go to Home > Conditional Formatting > New Rule.
Choose "Format cells that contain" → Select "Greater Than" → Enter =AVERAGE(range).

5) What formula removes extra spaces from a cell?

=TRIM(A1)

6) How do you create a dynamic chart that updates automatically?

Use excel tables as the data source, tabled expand automatically when new data is added.

7) What is the purpose of Excel Tables?

Tables simplify data management by enabling structured referencing, dynamic ranges , and filtering.

8) You are given a dataset with missing or incorrect values. What steps would you take to clean the data?

1- Remove Blank Rows or Columns: Use filters to identify blank rows.
    Go to Home > Find & Select > Go to Special > Blanks, then delete them.
2- Identify Missing Values: Use Conditional Formatting to highlight blanks:
    Go to Home > Conditional Formatting > New Rule > Format only cells that contain > Blanks.
    Replace missing values using formulas like =IF(A1="", "N/A", A1) or fill them manually.
3- Handle Missing Data:Use techniques like: Replacing blanks with 0: =IF(A1="", 0, A1)
    Filling with column averages: =IF(A1="", AVERAGE(range), A1)
    Carrying forward previous values using Power Query or Fill Handle.
4- Correct Incorrect Values: Use Data Validation to flag values outside acceptable ranges. Use Find and Replace for common errors (e.g., misspellings).
5- Trim Extra Spaces: Use the TRIM function to remove extra spaces: =TRIM(A1).
6- Convert Data Types: Ensure consistent formats for dates, numbers, and text. Use the Text to Columns tool to split and correct values.
7- Remove Duplicates: Go to Data > Remove Duplicates to clean redundant entries.
8- Validate the Data: Use Conditional Formatting or pivot tables to check for inconsistencies.

9) what steps would you take to prepare Excel Data for import into another program for example SQL?

To prepare Excel data for SQL or other programs:

1- Clean the Data: Remove blanks, errors, and duplicates.
2- Standardize formats (e.g., dates as YYYY-MM-DD).
3- Ensure Consistent Data Types: Verify each column has a consistent data type (e.g., text, numbers, dates).
4- Remove Special Characters: Use CLEAN or SUBSTITUTE to remove non-printable or special characters.
5- Remove Unnecessary Formatting: Avoid merged cells, conditional formatting, and unnecessary styles.
6- Normalize Data: Split concatenated data into separate columns. Use Text to Columns for splitting.
7- Add Unique Identifiers: Include a primary key column to ensure each record is unique.
8- Export in a Compatible Format: Save the file as a .CSV or .TXT format for SQL import:
9- Verify the delimiter (commas, tabs, etc.) matches SQL requirements.
10- Check for Null Values: Replace blanks with NULL or an appropriate value.
11- Validate the Data: Use Excel’s Data Validation to ensure data consistency.
12- Test Import: Import a small sample into SQL to ensure data integrity before importing the full dataset.

10) What is the difference between FIND and SEARCH functions?

FIND is case-sensitive, while SEARCH is case-insensitive.
Both return the position of a character or substring in a text.
Example:
=FIND("A", "Data Analytics")  // Returns 6 (case-sensitive)  
=SEARCH("a", "Data Analytics")  // Returns 2 (case-insensitive)  

11) What is the difference between CONCATENATE and TEXTJOIN?

CONCATENATE joins two or more text values but does not allow a delimiter.
TEXTJOIN joins multiple text values with a specified delimiter.
Example:
=CONCATENATE(A1, " ", B1)  
=TEXTJOIN(", ", TRUE, A1:A5)  // Joins A1:A5 with ", " 

12) How do you extract the first, middle, or last name from a full name column?

First Name: =LEFT(A1, FIND(" ", A1) - 1)
Last Name: =RIGHT(A1, LEN(A1) - FIND(" ", A1))
Middle Name (if applicable): Use MID function.

13) How do you perform a case-sensitive lookup in Excel?

Use INDEX and MATCH with EXACT:
=INDEX(B2:B10, MATCH(TRUE, EXACT(A2:A10, "search_value"), 0))

14) How do you use the IFERROR function?

IFERROR replaces errors with a custom value.
=IFERROR(A1/B1, "Error: Division by Zero")  

15) What is the difference between SUBSTITUTE and REPLACE functions?

SUBSTITUTE replaces specific text in a string.
REPLACE replaces text based on position.
Example:
=SUBSTITUTE("Excel is fun", "fun", "powerful")  // "Excel is powerful"  
=REPLACE("Excel123", 6, 3, "ABC")  // "ExcelABC" 

16) How do you rank values in Excel?

Use the RANK function:
=RANK(A1, A1:A10)  
Ranks A1 within A1:A10.

17) How do you extract only numbers from an alphanumeric string?

Use FILTERXML (for Excel 365) or array formulas:
=TEXTJOIN("", TRUE, IF(ISNUMBER(MID(A1, ROW(A1:A100), 1) * 1), MID(A1, ROW(A1:A100), 1), ""))

18) How do you create a drop-down list in Excel?

Select a cell → Go to Data → Data Validation.
Choose List and enter values or select a range.
Click OK to create the dropdown.

19) How do you create a dependent drop-down list?

Use Named Ranges and INDIRECT:
Define a named range for each category.
Use =INDIRECT(A1) in Data Validation to make it dependent.

20) How do you automate tasks in Excel?

Use Macros (VBA) to automate repetitive tasks.
Use Power Query for data transformation.
Use Power Automate for workflows.
